MIT CSAIL
6.s978 Deep Generative Models
Fall 2024
Problem Set 1
Posted: Tuesday, Sep. 05, 2024 Due: Tuesday 11:59 pm, Sep. 24, 2024
We provide a Python notebook with the code to be completed. You can run it locally or on
Google Colab. To use Colab, upload it to Google Drive and double-click the notebook (or
right-click and select Open with Google Colaboratory), which will allow you to complete the
problems without setting up your own environment.
Submission Instructions: Please submit two files on Gradescope: Submit (1) Your report
named kerberos.pdf which should include your answers to all required questions with
images/plots showing your results as well as the code you wrote (e.g., using screenshots); (2)
The provided Python notebook with the relevant source code and with all the cells run.
Attention: If you fail to include your code in your report in your submission, we
will not be able to give you credit for your code, so please do not forget.
Late Submission Policy: If your Problem Set is submitted within 7 days of the original
deadline, you will receive partial credit. Such submissions will be penalized by a multiplicative
coefficient that linearly decreases from 1 to 0.5, step-wise on each day’s 11:59pm cutoff.
In this problem set, you will be experimenting with Auto-Encoders (AEs) and Variational
Auto-Encoders (VAEs) using PyTorch. To reduce training time, we recommend using GPU
acceleration. Colab comes with free GPU support. On Colab, select GPU as your runtime
type as follows:
Runtime → Change runtime type → Hardware accelerator → GPU → Save.
If you exceed your GPU usage limit on Colab, don’t fret. You can also complete your problem
set using a regular CPU in a reasonable amount of time.
Problem 0 Notebook Submission, .ipynb version (1 point, required)
Problem 1 Auto-Encoder on MNIST (20 points)
We will start by implementing a simple auto-encoder (AE) using PyTorch and training it on
the MNIST dataset.
(a) Finish the implementation of self.encoder and self.decoder in AE() model.
1(b) Train the AE model on the MNIST dataset (manual tuning of parameters such
as epochs, hidden dims, and lr may be necessary). Use the provided evaluation
code to visualize the reconstruction results and the generated images (in 2D grid)
for the last epoch.
In the following two problems, we explore the VAE framework and its application to the
MNIST dataset.
Problem 2 Variational Auto-Encoder on MNIST: Stoachastic Gradient Variational Bayes
(SGVB) Estimator (30 points)
We first focus on the Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes (SGVB) Estimator, which is a
technique used to train VAEs by maximizing the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) on the
marginal log-likelihood of the data.
Given data x (binary images for MNIST) and latent variable z, ELBO can be expressed as
log p(x) ≥ Eq(z|x)[log p(x, z)
q(z|x) ] = ELBO
(a) Give a detailed mathematical proof of the ELBO starting from the marginal
log-likelihood log p(x). Show all steps clearly.
In practice, the expectation Eq(z|x)[·] is estimated using Monte Carlo sampling, yielding the
SGVB estimator:
ELBO ≈
X
i,j
[log p(xi|zi,j) + logp(zi,j) − log q(zi,j|xi)],
where zi,j is sampled from q(z|xi) = N (z; µi, σ2
i I). In this assignment, by default, we only
sample one zi,j for each xi (see the function reparameterize() in the VAE() class).
(b) Complete the implementation of the self.encoder and self.decoder in the
VAE() model.
(c) Implement the reparameterization trick in the reparameterize() function.
(d) Finalize the SGVB estimator by completing the log normal pdf() function,
which computes the log probability for a normal distribution given its mean and
variance.
Problem 3 Variational Auto-Encoder on MNIST: Analytical KL Divergence w/o Estimation
(30 points)
In many cases, Monte Carlo sampling is not necessary to estimate all the terms of the ELBO,
as some terms can be integrated analytically. In particular, when both q(z|x) and p(z) are
2Gaussian distributions, the ELBO can be decomposed into an analytical KL divergence plus
the expected reconstruction error.
Assume that:
• The prior p(z) is a standard Gaussian distribution: p(z) = N (z; 0, I).
• The approximate posterior q(z|x) is a Gaussian distribution with mean µ(x) and diag-
onal covariance matrix diag(σ2(x)): q(z|x) = N (z; µ(x), diag(σ2(x))).
The ELBO can then be expressed as:
ELBO = Eq(z|x)[log p(x|z)] − DKL(q(z|x)∥p(z))
= 1
2
X
d
(1 + log((σd)2) − (µd)2 − (σd)2) +
X
i,j
log p(xi|zi,j),
where d is the dimension of the latent space, and i, j are the indices of the data and the latent
samples, respectively.
(a) Give a detailed mathematical proof of the above ELBO decomposition. Show all
steps clearly.
(b) Run the verfirication code to check if the analytical KL divergence matches the
Monte Carlo estimate.
(c) Using the above two losses, train two VAE models on the MNIST dataset (manual
tuning of parameters such as epochs, hidden dims, lr, coeff may be necessary).
Use the provided evaluation code to visualize the reconstruction results and the
generated images (in 2D grid) for both models.
Problem 4 Training a V AE on a Point Cloud of a Torus (20 points)
In this problem, you will train a VAE on a 3D point cloud of a torus. The goal is to learn
a latent space representation that allows for meaningful interpolation between points on the
torus. The training code and point cloud generation code are provided. The VAE should be
trained using an analytical KL divergence for the latent space distribution.
(a) Train the VAE on the torus point cloud data using the provided training code.
After training, visualize the reconstruction results by decoding latent vectors back
to 3D points and comparing the reconstructed torus to the original point cloud.
Next, you will explore the interpolation properties of the latent space by performing linear
interpolation between two randomly selected points in the latent space.
(b) Run the provided code to perform linear interpolation between two randomly
selected points in the latent space. Visualize the resulting 3D trajectory.
Without surprise, the linear interpolation trajectory exhibits characteristics more akin to
a straight-line in Euclidean space rather than adhering to the curved nature of the torus
3Figure 1: Ideal interpolation trajectory on the torus surface.
surface. This discrepancy is indicative of the limitations inherent in the current latent space
representation, which fails to adequately capture the underlying toroidal geometry of the data.
(c) [Optional] Modify the VAE architecture and the latent code representation to
better capture the intrinsic toroidal structure of the data, ensuring that the output
of linear interpolation trajectories aligns with and follows the torus surface. The
resulting interpolation trajectory should be similar to Figure 1.
4