MIT CSAIL
6.s978 Deep Generative Models
Fall 2024
Problem Set 4
Posted: Tuesday, Oct. 22, 2024
Due: Tuesday 11:59 pm, Nov. 05, 2024
We provide a Python notebook with the code to be completed. You can run it locally or on
Google Colab. To use Colab, upload it to Google Drive and double-click the notebook (or
right-click and select Open with Google Colaboratory), which will allow you to complete the
problems without setting up your own environment.
Submission Instructions: Please submit two files on Canvas: Submit (1) Your report
named kerberos.pdf which should include your answers to all required questions with
images/plots showing your results as well as the code you wrote (e.g., using screenshots); (2)
The provided Python notebook with the relevant source code and with all the cells run.
Attention: If you fail to include your code in your report in your submission, we
will not be able to give you credit for your code, so please do not forget.
Late Submission Policy: If your Problem Set is submitted within 7 days of the original
deadline, you will receive partial credit. Such submissions will be penalized by a multiplicative
coefficient that linearly decreases from 1 to 0.5, step-wise on each day’s 11:59pm cutoff.
In this problem set, you will be experimenting with GANs using PyTorch. To reduce training
time, we recommend using GPU acceleration.
Colab comes with free GPU support.
On
Colab, select GPU as your runtime type as follows:
Runtime →Change runtime type →Hardware accelerator →GPU →Save.
If you exceed your GPU usage limit on Colab, don’t fret. You can also complete your problem
set using a regular CPU in a reasonable amount of time.
Problem 0 Notebook Submission, .ipynb version (1 point, required)
Problem 1 DDPM on MNIST (40 points)
In this problem set, you will implement a Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM)
for the MNIST dataset. The DDPM is a generative model that progressively corrupts a data
sample through a series of noise additions (forward process) and then learns to reverse this
process to generate new samples (reverse process). This assignment will guide you through
implementing key components of DDPM and training the model on MNIST.
The forward process in DDPM progressively adds Gaussian noise to an image over T timesteps.
1
The noise schedule is controlled by a series of variance values βt, which determine how much
noise is added at each timestep.
The key quantities for the forward process contain: βt: the variance schedule for each timestep,
and ¯αt: the cumulative product of αt up to timestep t.
The mathematical formulation for these terms is as follows:
βt = βmin + t · βmax −βmin
T −1
,
t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , T −1
where βmin and βmax are hyperparameters controlling the noise at the first and final timesteps.
We define αt and ¯αt as:
αt = 1 −βt
¯αt =
tY
i=1
αi
(a) Implement the ddpm schedules() function.
The forward process of DDPM gradually adds noise to the data at each timestep t. Given a
data sample x0 and a timestep t, the noisy version xt can be computed as:
xt = √¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I)
Here, ϵ is Gaussian noise sampled at each timestep. You will need to use the precomputed
values of ¯αt from the ddpm schedules() function.
(b) Implement forward() to return xt given x0 and timestep t.
Given xT ∼N(0, I) (a pure Gaussian noise), the reverse process can be written as:
xt−1 =
1
√αt

xt −1 −αt
√1 −¯αt
ϵθ(xt, t)

+ σtz,
z ∼N(0, I)
where σt is related to the variance at each step.
(c) Implement sample() to generate new samples by iteratively applying the reverse
process starting from xT .
(d) Train the DDPM model on the MNIST dataset using the code provided.
Problem 2 Ablation Study of DDPM on MNIST (30 points)
2
You will investigate the performance of DDPM on MNIST under varying conditions. Specif-
ically, you will implement two modifications:
1. Vary the number of timesteps to 2000 and 500 and observe the effect on generation
quality.
2. Implement a resampling schedule for inference with 50 and 100 steps instead of 1000-step
used during training.
For each experiment, train the DDPM on the MNIST dataset, and evaluate the
quality of the generated images. Compare the results of each experiment to the
baseline DDPM trained in Problem 1.
Problem 3 Continuous-time Stochastic Process (40 points)
Figure 1: Continuous-time Stochastic Process.
In this problem you will implement a toy model of continuous-time stochastic process, pro-
ducing a figure similar to Figure 1. We will follow the notations in the paper of “Score-Based
Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential Equations” (https://arxiv.org/pdf/
2011.13456). Read carefully the Appendix C about the SDE formulation of DDPM. Assume
the data distribution p(x(0)) = P2
i=1 πiN(x(0); µi, σi), x ∈R is a mixture of two gaussians.
(a) Write the formula for p(x(t)) =
R
p(x(t)|x(0))p(x(0))dx0 in terms of t, βmin, and
βmax.
(b) Calculate the analytical form of ∇xt log pt(x). Note that in practice this term is
being learned by the neural network in the SDE formulation.
(c) Implement both functions in code and visualize the forward and reverse SDE.
3
